[music]
>> Bloomberg Audio Studios. Podcasts,
radio, news.
>> We begin the week with the US and Iran
having reached an interim deal to end
hostilities and reopen [music] the
Strait of Hormuz.
>> sent oil prices lower and sparked a
relief rally across Asian markets.
[music] Officials from both countries
set to meet now in Switzerland on June
the 19th where the agreement will be
formalized.
>> Everyone has discovered [music] from the
past 6 years that these big one-off,
supposedly one-off, disruptions can
happen with frequency. That's [music]
Bloomberg's Tracy Alloway. Tracy
co-hosts the Odd Lots podcast and she
spends a lot of time
>> [music]
>> looking at the long-term impacts of
geopolitics on the global economy.
>> [music]
>> And so the lesson that everyone's been
internalizing is that you need to build
up stockpiles, you need to have
independence [music]
in terms of your crucial supplies, you
need to have additional capacity.
>> And few places have shown [music] the
need for independence and extra capacity
more clearly than in Asia over the past
few months. After the US and Israel went
to war with Iran, the Strait of Hormuz
grounded [music] to a halt, choking off
supplies of virtually every major
commodity,
>> [music]
>> including 1/5 of the world's oil.
>> But I think a lot of great things are
going to happen in the Middle East right
now and very importantly the oil is
plummeting down.
>> At the G7 summit in France, President
[music] Trump touted a deal the US
reached with Iran's regime over the
weekend, which he says will reopen the
Strait of Hormuz. [music]
>> Essentially ships are starting to go
out.
Now on Friday it'll be completely
opened.
We got a little
>> Across Asia, countries are welcoming the
US-Iran peace deal that would help to
stabilize global energy prices and
reopen [music] a vital shipping route.
But many are skeptical that will happen.
And even if it does, for Asia, that
shift might be too little, [music] too
late.
>> There is this brewing, but not yet
impacting food issue that will arise in
Southeast Asia specifically.
>> That's Bloomberg's Joe Weisenthal. He
co-hosts Odd Lots with Tracy.
>> The closure of the Strait of Hormuz is
going to create a food stress in much of
the world during the next planting
season.
>> Mhm.
>> And if there's food stress, people will
be buying food and not random
manufactured goods in China come that
time. And so, there may be an element
where China is choosing to reduce its
imports so that its customers of
manufacturers
have more capacity come next year.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Welcome to the Big Take Asia from
Bloomberg News. I'm Won Kim.
Today, I'm sitting down with my
colleagues Tracy Alloway and Joe
Weisenthal, co-hosts of Bloomberg's Odd
Lots [music] podcast.
We recorded this conversation just
before news broke that Iran and the US
may have struck a deal [music] to reopen
the Strait of Hormuz.
And as you'll hear, this discussion is
arguably just as relevant now as when we
[music] taped it. While the reopening of
the Strait would be a welcome relief,
the structural [music] shifts caused by
the conflict have fundamentally changed
businesses across Asia.
And the resulting pressure on food and
energy supplies
>> [music]
>> and prices isn't going away anytime
soon.
On today's show, we dive into why Asia
is feeling more economic pain from this
conflict than Western nations, and what
the new normal looks like for the region
and [music] the rest of the world.
While the details [music] of the
proposed new deal between the US and
Iran remain unclear, one thing is
certain. War in Iran and the virtual
closure of the Strait of Hormuz have
effectively slapped a war tax on vital
products and it's impacted every corner
of the global economy.
You've probably felt the pinch in one
way or another, but its effects haven't
been distributed evenly. [music]
Wealthy countries like the US and Japan
have opted to drain their stockpiles
[music] of crude oil. In other corners
of the world, governments are turning to
demand destruction by encouraging
industries and consumers to use less.
But that [music] risks slowing economic
growth and triggering recession.
It's a glaring disparity and Bloomberg's
Tracy [music] Alloway says it highlights
a structural vulnerability.
>> They're often poorer countries. They
don't have as big stockpiles of oil
inventory. And the one thing we've seen
developed countries do across the world
is really start to dig into those
stockpiles and release barrels in order
to, I guess, cushion the higher prices.
And so for a poorer country, I think
that's one of the reasons in Asia you're
seeing the governments really focused on
demand destruction rather than propping
up prices. So you've had I think India
was encouraging people not to go on
flights. People are being urged not to
drive to work, things like that. China
is doing pretty much all the heavy
lifting in terms of demand destruction
or really the bulk of it. So I saw a JP
Morgan estimate, I think, saying that
demand for oil from China had fallen
like 9%. I think that's 1.5 million
barrels a day.
>> It's huge.
>> Yeah, it's a pretty big deal and again,
it stands in stark contrast to a lot of
the developed nations like the US that
are really digging into their
stockpiles. You know, I don't know if
you guys have noticed in your time here
the prices at gas stations. Do you know
how much gas in Hong Kong cost?
>> No.
>> About 33 Hong Kong dollars per liter,
which is it's equivalent of about $16
per gallon.
>> Wow.
>> Right? That's up about 15% since the
Iran war began and diesel prices have
actually jumped like near 50% and I
wonder how does this stack up to what
we've seen in the US? And and I guess
more importantly, how does that feed
into inflationary pressures?
>> I mean, if we had $16 gasoline in the
US, there would definitely be a
there would be a revolution for sure.
Clearly inflation is trending up in the
US for a number of reasons. One of them
is oil and so you might say, well, you
strip that out cuz that goes into
headline rather than core inflation, but
then when you think about like
everything has oil or energy in it
especially because of transport costs,
[music]
it just builds that upward pressure.
Throw in all the data center spending
and the story is just like building heat
and pressure on everything and oil is
just part of it.
>> In some countries with limited
resources, governments are left with
little choice but to turn the lights
off.
But wealthier countries are playing a
very different game. [music]
Instead of asking citizens to cut back,
the countries who can afford it [music]
are spending heavily to absorb the
sticker shock at the pump.
You know, here in Hong Kong, the
government is putting aside the
equivalent of 230 million US dollars in
a subsidy program to help manage soaring
fuel prices.
It does seem like there's this imbalance
in how the burden of the conflict is
being carried, right? You've got
developed economies like Hong Kong and
Germany able to afford these subsidies
while you've got emerging countries who
literally can't keep the lights on.
What do you guys make of that disparity
and I guess the question is is this
something the US policy makers even
think about?
>> Probably not to be honest. One of the
interesting things here is to me is how
long the US can actually offset the pain
of higher prices. They've obviously been
releasing a lot from the strategic
petroleum reserve.
The question is how long can you
actually keep doing it? And apparently
the US is now getting pretty close to
its operational minimum. So I think
>> I think the minimum is like 250 million
barrels and we're now at
>> 349 million. Yeah, it's the lowest.
We're back to the post-COVID lows.
>> Wow, that's right. So the issue in the
US is like
crunch time could come, right? Like
>> They're going to lose that buffer pretty
soon.
>> Yeah.
>> And I think Asia does seem caught in
this trap that really is not of its own
making, right? You've got interest rates
that are rising globally, of course
driven by the war shocks and the AI
investment boom centered in the US and
the West. You've got the US dollar
really strong right now.
What do you think is the impact of the
US dollar strengthening on emerging
Asian economies?
>> Not good. So
there's the outlook for economic growth
and there's the outlook for the fiscal
side, let's say.
And so
if you're spending money to subsidize
oil prices and you're running through
your stockpiles in some instances, then
it becomes more expensive the longer it
goes on. One of the theories I've seen
for the falling gold price recently is
that governments are selling or central
banks are
are selling reserve assets in order to
raise more foreign effects so that they
can buy more oil at the higher prices.
So it exacerbates foreign currency
exposure for emerging markets and
probably weakens their fiscal position
in the future. And then in terms of
economic growth, so obviously if you
can't get oil, if you can't get
feedstock for plastics, that's pretty
much in everything and so you'll see
less economic activity. But on the other
hand,
if we see some countries respond to
higher oil prices by actually building
out more clean energy capacity, selling
more EVs for instance, then like that
could be a little bit of an economic
boost. And I'm not saying that it's
enough to fully offset the impact, but
like it's something at least.
>> So like let's get back to the context of
the question. It doesn't matter what the
price of the dollar is, people are going
to spend a crazy amount of money on
memory chips from Korea, period. The won
could go up, the won could go down, it
doesn't matter. We're going to be
shipping a lot of dollars to Korea and
Taiwan for key infrastructure for the AI
buildout. And so I think yes,
absolutely, like the strength of the
dollar is real, but I think we're in
this very odd moment where because the
AI race feels existential, that the
traditional macro signals that we would
look at like rates and FX are being
swamped by the spending that everyone
has just chosen to make for existential
reasons on so many aspects of AI.
>> Yeah, and to your point, Asia is the
backbone of the global AI ecosystem.
Factories here produce chips that power
the AI revolution. But those factories
rely heavily on energy and raw
materials, right? So what happens if
there's ongoing uncertainty or
disruption at the Strait of Hormuz?
>> Should we do helium?
>> Yeah, I was going to Yeah, go for it.
>> No, you start.
>> Well, I was just going to say like
both of our minds went to helium at the
same time. So it's like this is uh
pretty important in advanced
semiconductor manufacturing, helium.
Please don't ask me exactly why, but it
has to do something with like its
ability to go down to incredibly cold
temperatures, which is helpful in all
kinds of different ways. But there is
not a lot of elasticity in helium
supply. And so if there's going to be
like one link where the persistent
closure of the Strait of Hormuz might
actually intersect with that, it would
be if they truly run out of helium. And
then you just really have a much harder
time making chips.
>> Now, I want to shift to interest rates
for [music] a bit. Japan's wholesale
inflation accelerated in May at its
fastest [music] pace in 3 years, and its
producer price index also surged to 6.3%
[music]
was quite high. That puts a lot of
pressure on the Bank of Japan to hike
interest rates. [music] And across Asia,
you are seeing countries raising their
inflation projections and pushing
interest rates higher. [music]
What do you think would be the broader
impact of prolonged inflation across
Asia?
And what does it mean for US consumers?
>> [music]
>> So, the inflationary impact is there,
right? And it's not even necessarily
oil, it's also those petrochemicals
which go into everything. And then the
other thing in terms of inflation,
governments and companies around the
world are learning that it's important
to build up stockpiles, and it's
important to build out your energy
capacity or your petrochemical capacity
or your chips capacity, [music] things
like that.
If you have everyone all at once trying
to do this, that consumes resources,
right? That is de facto inflationary.
And I think that's [music] probably the
lesson we have collectively learned from
[music] the past few years is that you
don't want to be left high and dry if
there's a big disruption. It is really
important to have extra stuff.
And extra stuff, you know, means higher
prices.
>> [music]
>> After the break, why we may not yet have
seen the full extent of damage caused by
the closure of the Strait of Hormuz, and
how the fallout from the war is
reshaping Asia's relationship with the
rest [music] of the world.
>> [music]
>> The supply shock caused by the closure
of the Strait of Hormuz is [music]
arguably the biggest ever. But by
draining reserves, finding workarounds,
and managing demand,
>> [music]
>> governments have tried to shield their
citizens from the pain, or delaying it
at least. Even if the Strait does open
this weekend, Bloomberg's [music] Joe
Weisenthal and Tracy Alloway say that
pain might still be coming.
Richer countries [music] will be able to
spend to ease it, but poorer countries
in Asia don't have those resources.
[music] And that could spell trouble for
everyone.
You guys spoke with a former farmer,
Lorcan Kelly, on one of your recent
episodes.
>> The problem's going to arise in 6
months, in 12 months time, when the
decisions we made today about do I plant
that field, Louise, or do I breed more
cattle next year? And farmers are going
to say, "No, we're not going to do
that." If you look
>> You know, across Southeast Asia right
now, farmers are now skipping this
planting season, right? Because they
can't afford the diesel for the
tractors, they can't afford the diesel
for the water pumps, right? That they
need to to cultivate the crops. And some
are actually choosing to leave crops
rotting in the ground because they can't
afford to harvest. I mean, that's huge,
right? I mean, Asia
>> So, this is what I was saying earlier,
that perhaps one of the shoes that may
be yet to drop is a food crisis in Asia,
and it's perhaps the hierarchy of needs,
right? If you're struggling to buy food,
you're not going to be buying
electronics, right? From China, whatever
it else. And so, perhaps one part of the
logic for China to reduce its imports is
to ease a little bit of that squeeze.
But what I have heard, which is that
there is this brewing, but not yet
impacting food issue that will arise in
Southeast Asia specifically.
>> When it comes to the impact of
fertilizer, we're talking about longer
time frames cuz there are planting
seasons, as you just mentioned. One
historical anecdote that I learned from
Adam Tooze is that apparently in ancient
Roman times, emperors would try to time
wars so that they weren't during the
planting season.
So that it wouldn't disrupt food
supplies and also so that farmers could
actually go off and be soldiers, but
clearly we seem to have forgotten that
lesson.
>> I want to stay on food for a bit. You
know, in Thailand, I was there in in
Bangkok just a couple weeks ago and
talked to our colleagues there. I mean,
they've done some really great reporting
on how fishermen in Thailand are keeping
their boats anchored because fuel eats
up more than half of the cost of every
trip. So, you know, they basically can't
raise the the price of their catch,
right? So so they they're deciding not
to go out. And I wonder to what extent
should policy makers and leaders worry
about this, you know, turning into a
political problem, right? This ag issue.
>> Yeah, I mean, look, I don't know if I
ever fully bought the theory, but you
know, there was a there were many people
who argued, for example, that the
catalyst for the Arab Spring was wheat
prices that year. And you know, our
leadership has other things on their
mind. We're talking about this is very
classic type of thing that creates real
political disruption, and I don't think
we should have the hubris to assume that
these cycles, which have probably have
data points going back thousands of
years have suddenly stopped.
>> And I guess with sanctions, I mean I do
wonder to what extent that the oil
crunch would lead to the weakening of
essentially one of the US's biggest
non-military weapons, right? Sanctions.
>> There was an interesting article in the
Wall Street Journal that the North
Korean economy is doing surprisingly
well. They're actually building a lot of
housing and there's sort of quite a
little evidence of like improving
standard of living and so forth. And of
course here is a one of the most
sanctioned countries on Earth for a very
long time.
I just think like
the degree to which sanctions are a
powerful tool or that they can really be
used to like crush any enemy, all of
it's being called into question right
now.
>> Now let's say the war ends next week.
>> [music]
>> How do you think the world has
fundamentally been changed because of
this war and how it's [music] played
out?
>> So I think it goes back to I guess the
idea of the choke point economy. So
everyone has discovered from the [music]
past 6 years that these big one-off,
supposedly one-off, [music] disruptions
can happen with frequency, right? So
each disruption is slightly different in
what it actually is, but they're
happening more often.
>> [music]
>> I mean, I'm sure both of us having been
in Hong Kong during the pandemic,
>> [music]
>> I will always keep an extra supply of
toilet paper from now until forever,
basically. We all learned that and so I
I think [music] that impulse is going to
stick around for a long time.
>> Uh the world is very globalized. I feel
like for me coming here to Hong Kong,
it's been very helpful reminder like how
integrated
>> [music]
>> the world still is. But these are where
the the wheels are all spinning in the
opposite direction of where they were
in, you know, the second half of the
20th century, trade barriers are going
up and countries don't trust each other
and that is going to have consequences
for both productivity and prices.
>> [music]
[music]
>> This is the Big Take Asia from Bloomberg
News. I'm Wan Ha. To get more from the
Big Take and unlimited access to all of
bloomberg.com, subscribe [music] today
at bloomberg.com/podcastoffer.
If you like the episode, make sure to
subscribe and review the Big Take Asia
wherever you listen to podcasts. [music]
It really helps people find the show.
Thanks for listening. See you next time.
>> [music]